---
title: Tetanus Prevention/Treatment: Evidence Review & Call for missing trials
layout: post
date: 2023-06-04
categories: health
hidden: true
---
Tetanus is a very severe disease that results in an inability of the brain and the nervous system to control the muscles in the body, resulting episodes in involuntary skeletal muscles spasms, some severe enough to fracture bones.
It can also interfere with normal functioning of heart muscles and cause severe disturbances in heart rate, heart rythm, and blood pressure. It can also interfere with lung muscles and disrupt breathing and thus cause death.
Even if treated early with the “state-of-the-art” techniques, over 10% of the patients die.
Depending on different studies, this number can be as high as 50%.
I discuss these and other tetanus epidemiology studies and highlight some findings not usually mentioned in articles about tetanus, e.g. about what kind of injuries are tetanus prone.


There are vaccines to prevent tetanus.
Although they appear to be effective and a RCT (Randomized Controlled Trial) has shown them to be 98% causally effective in preventing tetanus during birth from unsanitary cord cutting, there is no such gold-standard evidence to estimate the effectiveness of tetanus vaccines in preventing tetanus after birth, e.g. in adults sustaining injuries.
I review many observational studies and trials in animals that may help estimate this number.

In the last few decades, some of the tetanus vaccines, especially DTP, has been found to have a wide range of deleterious effects, although many claim these are less severe than tetanus.
I discuss evidence of deleterious effects in depth but let the reader decide whether those risks outweigh the benefits.
I call for and sketch the design of trials that would make it much easier to make this decision: the decision would be very easy if there was a very safe and 100% effective treatment of tetanus: numerous animal trials and (only) 1 human trial have shown a very safe substance to be 100% effective in treating tetanus.
Also, the same treatment has also 100% effectiveness in animal trials in treating many other diseases with a similar mechanism: toxin producing bacteria, e.g. Diptheria, Pertussis (the D and P in DTP/ DTaP vaccines). Animal experiments suggest it likely works by neutralizing the toxins.
But because of the severity of the tetanus, more confirmatory/refuting trials are needed before that treatment can be taken seriously or dismissed entirely.
